docs/Implementation_Docs/MCP_TOOL_OBJECT_MIGRATION.md, before:

# MCP Tool Object Migration Implementation Doc

## Overview
This document tracks the migration of all MCP tool definitions in `handle_list_tools` from dictionaries to proper `Tool` objects, as required by the MCP server framework. This change is necessary to resolve the `'dict' object has no attribute 'name'` error and ensure full compatibility with the MCP protocol.

## Rationale
- The MCP server expects all tools to be instances of the `Tool` class (from `mcp.types`), not plain dictionaries.
- Returning dictionaries causes runtime errors and prevents tool listing and invocation from working.
- Migrating to `Tool` objects ensures type safety, future compatibility, and proper server operation.

## Technical Steps
1. Update the import in `mcp_server.py`:
   ```python
   from mcp.types import Tool
   ```
2. Change the return type of `handle_list_tools` to `List[Tool]`.
3. For each tool definition in the list, replace the dictionary with a `Tool(...)` object, preserving all fields.
4. Test the server to ensure all tools are listed and callable.
5. Document the migration and update CI/CD to catch similar issues in the future.

## Migration Checklist
- [x] Update import for `Tool`
- [x] Update return type annotation
- [x] Convert all tool definitions to `Tool` objects
- [x] Test integration and tool listing
- [ ] Update CI/CD to include integration test for tool initialization

### Tools to Migrate
- [x] query_dshield_events
- [x] stream_dshield_events_with_session_context
- [x] query_dshield_aggregations
- [x] stream_dshield_events
- [x] query_dshield_attacks
- [x] query_dshield_reputation
- [x] query_dshield_top_attackers
- [x] query_dshield_geographic_data
- [x] query_dshield_port_data
- [x] get_dshield_statistics
- [x] enrich_ip_with_dshield
- [x] generate_attack_report
- [x] query_events_by_ip
- [x] get_security_summary
- [x] test_elasticsearch_connection
- [x] get_data_dictionary
- [x] analyze_campaign
- [x] expand_campaign_indicators
- [x] get_campaign_timeline
- [x] compare_campaigns
- [x] detect_ongoing_campaigns
- [x] search_campaigns
- [x] get_campaign_details
- [x] generate_latex_document
- [x] list_latex_templates
- [x] get_latex_template_schema
- [x] validate_latex_document_data
- [x] enrich_ip_comprehensive
- [x] enrich_domain_comprehensive
- [x] correlate_threat_indicators
- [x] get_threat_intelligence_summary

## Summary
- All MCP tool definitions have been migrated to use the `Tool` object.
- The server now lists and registers all tools correctly, and the previous runtime error is resolved.
- Data dictionary and threat intelligence summary tools are working as expected.
- The only remaining issue is Elasticsearch v9 compatibility, which will be tracked in a separate issue.

Commit message:

docs: Add security and migration notes to MCP_TOOL_OBJECT_MIGRATION.md (closes #72)

docs/Implementation_Docs/MCP_TOOL_OBJECT_MIGRATION.md, after:

# MCP Tool Object Migration Implementation Doc

## Overview
This document tracks the migration of all MCP tool definitions in `handle_list_tools` from dictionaries to proper `Tool` objects, as required by the MCP server framework. This change is necessary to resolve the `'dict' object has no attribute 'name'` error and ensure full compatibility with the MCP protocol.

## Rationale
- The MCP server expects all tools to be instances of the `Tool` class (from `mcp.types`), not plain dictionaries.
- Returning dictionaries causes runtime errors and prevents tool listing and invocation from working.
- Migrating to `Tool` objects ensures type safety, future compatibility, and proper server operation.

## Technical Steps
1. Update the import in `mcp_server.py`:
   ```python
   from mcp.types import Tool
   ```
2. Change the return type of `handle_list_tools` to `List[Tool]`.
3. For each tool definition in the list, replace the dictionary with a `Tool(...)` object, preserving all fields.
4. Test the server to ensure all tools are listed and callable.
5. Document the migration and update CI/CD to catch similar issues in the future.

## Migration Checklist
- [x] Update import for `Tool`
- [x] Update return type annotation
- [x] Convert all tool definitions to `Tool` objects
- [x] Test integration and tool listing
- [ ] Update CI/CD to include integration test for tool initialization

### Tools to Migrate
- [x] query_dshield_events
- [x] stream_dshield_events_with_session_context
- [x] query_dshield_aggregations
- [x] stream_dshield_events
- [x] query_dshield_attacks
- [x] query_dshield_reputation
- [x] query_dshield_top_attackers
- [x] query_dshield_geographic_data
- [x] query_dshield_port_data
- [x] get_dshield_statistics
- [x] enrich_ip_with_dshield
- [x] generate_attack_report
- [x] query_events_by_ip
- [x] get_security_summary
- [x] test_elasticsearch_connection
- [x] get_data_dictionary
- [x] analyze_campaign
- [x] expand_campaign_indicators
- [x] get_campaign_timeline
- [x] compare_campaigns
- [x] detect_ongoing_campaigns
- [x] search_campaigns
- [x] get_campaign_details
- [x] generate_latex_document
- [x] list_latex_templates
- [x] get_latex_template_schema
- [x] validate_latex_document_data
- [x] enrich_ip_comprehensive
- [x] enrich_domain_comprehensive
- [x] correlate_threat_indicators
- [x] get_threat_intelligence_summary

## 🔒 Security Implications

- **Type Safety:** Migrating to `Tool` objects enforces type safety and prevents runtime errors due to unexpected dictionary structures. This reduces the risk of malformed tool definitions being registered or invoked.
- **Error Handling:** The new implementation ensures that all tools are validated at initialization, and errors are caught early in the server startup process. This prevents exposure of internal errors to clients and improves overall robustness.
- **Data Exposure:** Only properly defined and validated tools are listed and callable, reducing the risk of accidental exposure of internal or experimental tools.
- **Protocol Compliance:** Using `Tool` objects ensures strict adherence to the MCP protocol, preventing malformed or malicious tool definitions from affecting the server.

## 🔄 Migration Notes

- **Backward Compatibility:** The migration is fully backward compatible for clients. All existing tool invocations and workflows continue to work, with improved type safety and error handling.
- **Configuration:** No additional configuration is required. The migration is handled internally in the server code.
- **Upgrade Steps:**
  1. Update your MCP server to the latest version with the `Tool` object migration.
  2. Review and test tool listing and invocation with your existing workflows.
  3. Monitor for any new errors or issues after deployment.
- **Deprecations:** No breaking changes or deprecated features are introduced in this release. All previous tool functionality is preserved.

## Summary
- All MCP tool definitions have been migrated to use the `Tool` object.
- The server now lists and registers all tools correctly, and the previous runtime error is resolved.
- Data dictionary and threat intelligence summary tools are working as expected.
- The only remaining issue is Elasticsearch v9 compatibility, which will be tracked in a separate issue.
