docs/Enhancements.md, before:

# Critical Need: Pagination Implementation (Done)

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-05

**Summary:**
- Implemented robust pagination for large datasets using both page-based and cursor-based (search_after) strategies.
- Sorting is performed on a single field (typically @timestamp) to ensure compatibility with Elasticsearch settings (no _id fielddata required).
- Pagination metadata includes: page_size, page_number, total_available, has_more, total_pages, has_previous, has_next, sort_by, sort_order, and next_page_token (cursor).
- Field selection, sorting, and time range queries are fully supported.
- Thoroughly tested with real data; test script: `dev_tools/test_enhanced_pagination_fixed.py`.

**Test Results:**
- Pagination and metadata: ✅
- Field selection: ✅
- Sorting: ✅
- Cursor-based pagination: ✅ (for subsequent pages)
- Large dataset handling: ✅
- Specific IP query: Logic works, but no events for test IP in current index

---

Why Pagination is Essential:

Massive Data Volumes:

Single IP (141.98.80.135) generates >1MB of events in 24h
Campaign involves thousands of events per attacker
Current queries fail due to response size limits


Real-world Attack Campaigns:

This represents actual threat actor behavior
Advanced persistent threats generate massive event volumes
Analysis requires handling enterprise-scale datasets


Analysis Requirements:

Need to examine individual events within massive campaigns
Correlation analysis requires multiple event samples
Timeline reconstruction needs paginated event access



Recommended Pagination Strategy:
Suggested pagination parameters for massive campaigns
'''python
{
  "page_size": 100,           # Manageable chunk size
  "page": 1,                  # Current page
  "sort_by": "@timestamp",    # Consistent ordering
  "sort_order": "desc",       # Most recent first
  "total_available": 15847,   # Total matching events
  "has_more": true,          # Pagination indicator
  "cursor": "2025-07-04T12:41:16.136_AZfWUDhS4mHfpl_Krgfk"
}
'''
# High Priority Enhancements
## 1. Pagination Support (Done)
'''python
{
  "page_size": 100,
  "page_number": 1,
  "total_results": 15000,
  "has_more": true,
  "results": [...],
  "next_page_token": "abc123"
}
'''
## 2. Field Selection/Projection (Done)
'''python 
query_dshield_events(
    filters={"source_ip": "141.98.80.135"},
    fields=["@timestamp", "source_ip", "destination_port", "event.category"],
    size=1000
)
'''
## 3. Enhanced Time Range Handling (Done)
'''python
{
  "time_range": {
    "start": "2025-07-04T12:00:00Z",
    "end": "2025-07-04T13:00:00Z"
  }
  # OR
  "relative_time": "last_6_hours"
  # OR  
  "time_window": {"around": "2025-07-04T12:41:16Z", "window_minutes": 30}
}
'''
## 4. Aggregation Queries (Done)
'''python
query_dshield_aggregations(
    group_by=["source_ip", "destination_port"],
    metrics=["count", "unique_sessions"],
    time_range_hours=24,
    top_n=50
)
'''
## 6. Smart Query Optimization (Done)
Automatically optimize queries based on data volume
'''python 
query_dshield_events(
    filters={...},
    optimization="auto",  # auto-reduce fields if result too large
    fallback_strategy="aggregate"  # fall back to aggregations
)
'''
## 7. Query Performance Metrics (Done)
Track and return detailed query performance metrics for all queries.

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-05

**Implementation:** See [docs/performance_metrics.md](performance_metrics.md)

**Key Features:**
- Tracks query time, indices scanned, documents examined, query complexity, optimizations applied, and more
- Metrics included in `pagination_metadata` and aggregation responses
- Works for all query types: simple, complex, paginated, cursor-based, and aggregation
- Enables visibility into backend performance and optimization effectiveness

**Example Response:**
```json
{
  "pagination_metadata": { ... },
  "performance_metrics": {
    "query_time_ms": 1234,
    "optimization_applied": ["pagination", "field_reduction"],
    "indices_scanned": 5,
    "total_documents_examined": 10000,
    "query_complexity": "complex"
  }
}
```
=======

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-05

**Implementation Details:**
- **Automatic Size Estimation**: Estimates query result size before execution using count queries
- **Field Optimization**: Reduces fields to essential ones when results are too large (priority fields: @timestamp, source_ip, destination_ip, etc.)
- **Page Size Reduction**: Automatically reduces page size if needed (minimum 10)
- **Fallback Strategies**: 
  - `aggregate`: Returns aggregation results (top sources, destinations, event types, timeline)
  - `sample`: Returns a small sample of events (10 events)
  - `error`: Returns error with explanation
- **Configuration**: `max_result_size_mb` (default: 10.0), `query_timeout_seconds` (default: 30)
- **MCP Integration**: All parameters available in MCP server with enhanced response formatting
- **Test Coverage**: Comprehensive test script in `dev_tools/test_smart_query_optimization.py`

**Test Results:**
- Size estimation: ✅ (4.88 MB detected for large queries)
- Field reduction: ✅ (20 fields → 13 priority fields)
- Page size reduction: ✅ (1000 → 500 → fallback)
- Aggregation fallback: ✅ (returns summary events)
- Sampling fallback: ✅ (returns sample events)
- Performance monitoring: ✅ (optimization metadata included)
## 7. Template/Preset Queries
Pre-built queries for common analysis patterns
'''python
get_ssh_brute_force_analysis(time_range_hours=24)
get_port_scan_analysis(source_ip="1.2.3.4")
get_campaign_analysis(indicators=["ssh_key", "malware_hash"])
'''

## 8. Enhanced Export Options
# Different output formats
'''python
export_dshield_analysis(
    query={...},
    format="csv|json|misp|stix",
    include_metadata=True
)
'''
## 9. Smart Chunking with Session Context (Done)
Stream and chunk events by session context for better event correlation and analysis.

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-06

**Implementation:** See [docs/smart_chunking_session_context.md](smart_chunking_session_context.md)

**Key Features:**
- Groups events by session context (e.g., source.ip, user.name, session.id)
- Ensures related events stay together in the same chunk
- Session summaries and performance metrics included in response
- Fully integrated with MCP server and client
- Extensible for future session-aware analytics

**Example Response:**
```json
{
  "events": [ ... ],
  "total_count": 1000,
  "next_stream_id": "2025-07-06T10:00:00Z|abc123",
  "session_context": {
    "session_fields": ["source.ip", "destination.ip", "user.name", "session.id"],
    "sessions_in_chunk": 12,
    "session_summaries": [ ... ],
    "performance_metrics": { ... }
  }
}
```

## 10. Campaign Analysis Debugging & Fixes (Done)
Comprehensive debugging and resolution of campaign analysis system issues.

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-06

**Implementation:** See [docs/BUG_003_SEED_EVENT_RETRIEVAL_FIX_IMPLEMENTATION.md](BUG_003_SEED_EVENT_RETRIEVAL_FIX_IMPLEMENTATION.md)

**Key Fixes:**
- **BUG-001**: Field mapping issues resolved with ECS field support
- **BUG-002**: API parameter mismatches fixed
- **BUG-003**: Seed event retrieval failure resolved with simplified query logic
- **BUG-004**: Tuple unpacking errors fixed
- **BUG-005**: Query syntax errors resolved

**Test Results:**
- **Before:** 2/6 tests passing (33% success rate)
- **After:** 6/6 tests passing (100% success rate) ✅
- **Campaign Analysis:** Fully functional with all 7 correlation stages working
- **Production Ready:** Complete threat hunting capabilities

**GitHub Issues:**
- [#26](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/26) - BUG-001: Field Mapping Issues (RESOLVED)
- [#27](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/27) - BUG-003: Seed Event Retrieval Failure (RESOLVED)
- [#28](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/28) - BUG-002: API Parameter Mismatch (RESOLVED)
- [#29](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/29) - BUG-004: Tuple Unpacking Error (RESOLVED)
- [#30](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/30) - BUG-005: Query Syntax Error (RESOLVED)

**Pull Request:**
- [#35](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/pull/35) - Fix BUG-003: Resolve seed event retrieval failure and complete campaign analysis functionality
  }
}
```
## 10. Enhanced Threat Intelligence Integration
Bulk IP enrichment with caching
'''python 
enrich_bulk_ips(
    ip_list=["1.2.3.4", "5.6.7.8"],
    sources=["dshield", "virustotal", "shodan"],
    cache_duration_hours=24
)
'''
## 11. Query Performance Metrics
Return query performance data
'''python 
{
  "results": [...],
  "performance": {
    "query_time_ms": 1234,
    "index_hit_count": 5,
    "total_docs_scanned": 15000,
    "optimization_applied": "field_reduction"
  }
}
'''
## 12. Saved Queries and Dashboards
Save common queries for reuse
'''python 
save_query(
    name="daily_ssh_attacks",
    query={...},
    schedule="daily_at_09:00"
)
'''
# Specific Suggestions for Current Issues
## For the Large Dataset Problem:
Smart chunking with session context
'''python 
query_dshield_session_details(
    session_id="AZfWUDhS4mHfpl_Krgfk",
    include_related=True,
    max_related_events=100
)
'''
## For Event Correlation:
Get events related to specific event
'''python 
get_related_events(
    event_id="AZfWUDhS4mHfpl_Krgfk",
    correlation_fields=["source_ip", "session", "attack_pattern"],
    time_window_minutes=60
)
'''
## For Campaign Analysis:
Analyze attack campaigns
'''python
analyze_attack_campaign(
    seed_event="AZfWUDhS4mHfpl_Krgfk",
    expansion_criteria=["same_source_ip", "similar_ttps", "time_proximity"],
    max_events=1000
)
'''
# Configuration and Management
## 13. Dynamic Configuration
Adjustable limits and timeouts
'''python 
configure_mcp_server(
    max_result_size_mb=10,
    query_timeout_seconds=30,
    enable_auto_pagination=True,
    default_page_size=100
)
'''
## 14. Query History and Replay
Track and replay queries
'''python 
get_query_history(user_session="abc123")
replay_query(query_id="xyz789", modified_params={...})
'''
## 15. Field Mapping Bug Fix (Done)
Fix the mismatch between display fields and query fields as described in GitHub issue #17
'''python
# Before: User-friendly field names failed
query_dshield_events(filters={"source_ip": "141.98.80.135"})  # ❌ No results

# After: Intelligent field mapping works
query_dshield_events(filters={"source_ip": "141.98.80.135"})  # ✅ 10,000 events
query_dshield_events(filters={"source.ip": "141.98.80.135"})  # ✅ 10,000 events (same)
'''

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-05

**Implementation Details:**
- **Intelligent Field Mapping**: Automatically converts user-friendly field names to ECS dot notation
- **Comprehensive Coverage**: Maps 50+ common field variations (source_ip → source.ip, event_type → event.type, etc.)
- **Backward Compatibility**: ECS dot notation continues to work unchanged
- **Helpful Logging**: Logs field mappings and provides suggestions for unmapped fields
- **Query Consistency**: Both formats return identical results
- **Test Coverage**: Comprehensive test script in `dev_tools/test_field_mapping.py`

**Field Mapping Examples:**
- `source_ip`, `src_ip`, `sourceip` → `source.ip`
- `destination_ip`, `dest_ip`, `target_ip` → `destination.ip`
- `event_type`, `eventtype` → `event.type`
- `http_method`, `httpmethod` → `http.request.method`
- `user_agent`, `useragent`, `ua` → `user_agent.original`
- `severity` → `event.severity`
- `timestamp`, `time`, `date` → `@timestamp`

**Test Results:**
- User-friendly field names: ✅ (source_ip works)
- ECS dot notation: ✅ (source.ip works)  
- Mixed field formats: ✅ (both in same query)
- Field suggestions: ✅ (helpful alternatives)
- Query consistency: ✅ (identical results)
- Comprehensive mapping: ✅ (50+ field variations)

## 16. Campaign Analysis (Done)
Advanced threat hunting and investigation capabilities for coordinated attack campaigns.

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-06

**Implementation:** See [CAMPAIGN_ANALYSIS_IMPLEMENTATION.md](CAMPAIGN_ANALYSIS_IMPLEMENTATION.md)

**Key Features:**
- **Multi-Stage Correlation Engine**: 7-stage correlation pipeline (IP, infrastructure, behavioral, temporal, geospatial, signature, network)
- **7 MCP Tools**: Complete campaign investigation toolkit
- **Enhanced Behavioral Analysis**: Attack sequence detection, user agent patterns, payload signatures
- **Network Correlation**: Subnet-based analysis using `ipaddress` module
- **Campaign Data Models**: Campaign, CampaignEvent, and IndicatorRelationship classes
- **IOC Expansion**: Multiple strategies (comprehensive, infrastructure, temporal, network)
- **Timeline Building**: Configurable granularity with TTP analysis
- **Campaign Comparison**: Similarity analysis and attribution
- **Real-time Detection**: Ongoing campaign detection with configurable thresholds
- **User Configuration Integration**: Campaign settings in configuration system

**MCP Tools Implemented:**
1. `analyze_campaign` - Core campaign analysis from seed indicators
2. `expand_campaign_indicators` - IOC expansion with multiple strategies
3. `get_campaign_timeline` - Detailed attack timeline building
4. `compare_campaigns` - Campaign similarity and attribution analysis
5. `detect_ongoing_campaigns` - Real-time campaign detection
6. `search_campaigns` - Campaign search by criteria
7. `get_campaign_details` - Comprehensive campaign information

**Test Results:**
- All 11 tests passing (100% success rate)
- Multi-stage correlation: ✅
- MCP tool integration: ✅
- User configuration: ✅
- Error handling: ✅
- Performance metrics: ✅

**Production Ready:**
- Ready for live DShield SIEM integration
- Handles enterprise-scale event volumes (10,000+ events)
- Configurable thresholds and parameters
- Comprehensive error handling and logging
- Performance optimization and monitoring

**Example Usage:**
```python
# Analyze suspicious IP campaign
campaign = await analyze_campaign(
    seed_indicators=["192.168.1.100"],
    time_range_hours=168,
    correlation_methods=["ip_correlation", "temporal_correlation", "network_correlation"],
    min_confidence=0.7
)

# Expand campaign indicators
expanded = await expand_campaign_indicators(
    campaign_id="campaign_abc123",
    expansion_depth=3,
    expansion_strategy="comprehensive"
)

# Detect ongoing campaigns
ongoing = await detect_ongoing_campaigns(
    time_window_hours=24,
    min_event_threshold=15,
    correlation_threshold=0.8
)
```

Commit message:

fix: address Snyk-reported dependency vulnerabilities
- Upgrade aiohttp from >=3.8.0 to >=3.12.13 (latest secure version)
- Upgrade zipp from >=3.19.1 to >=3.23.0 (latest secure version)
- Confirm h11>=0.16.0 is already at latest secure version
- Remove ipaddress and uuid from requirements.txt (standard library modules)
- Update documentation in docs/Enhancements.md
- All updates maintain compatibility with modern Python versions (3.3+)

Addresses Snyk security findings for production deployment readiness.

docs/Enhancements.md, after:

# Security Updates - Dependency Vulnerabilities (Done)

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-01-27

**Summary:**
- Fixed Snyk-reported vulnerabilities in dependencies by upgrading to latest secure versions
- Upgraded `aiohttp` from `>=3.8.0` to `>=3.12.13` (latest secure version)
- Upgraded `zipp` from `>=3.19.1` to `>=3.23.0` (latest secure version)
- Confirmed `h11>=0.16.0` is already at latest secure version
- Removed `ipaddress` and `uuid` from requirements.txt (standard library modules in modern Python)
- All updates maintain compatibility with modern Python versions (3.3+)

**Security Impact:**
- Addresses potential vulnerabilities in HTTP client library (`aiohttp`)
- Fixes security issues in ZIP file handling (`zipp`)
- Reduces attack surface by removing unnecessary dependencies
- Maintains project security posture for production deployment

---

# Critical Need: Pagination Implementation (Done)

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-05

**Summary:**
- Implemented robust pagination for large datasets using both page-based and cursor-based (search_after) strategies.
- Sorting is performed on a single field (typically @timestamp) to ensure compatibility with Elasticsearch settings (no _id fielddata required).
- Pagination metadata includes: page_size, page_number, total_available, has_more, total_pages, has_previous, has_next, sort_by, sort_order, and next_page_token (cursor).
- Field selection, sorting, and time range queries are fully supported.
- Thoroughly tested with real data; test script: `dev_tools/test_enhanced_pagination_fixed.py`.

**Test Results:**
- Pagination and metadata: ✅
- Field selection: ✅
- Sorting: ✅
- Cursor-based pagination: ✅ (for subsequent pages)
- Large dataset handling: ✅
- Specific IP query: Logic works, but no events for test IP in current index

---

Why Pagination is Essential:

Massive Data Volumes:

Single IP (141.98.80.135) generates >1MB of events in 24h
Campaign involves thousands of events per attacker
Current queries fail due to response size limits


Real-world Attack Campaigns:

This represents actual threat actor behavior
Advanced persistent threats generate massive event volumes
Analysis requires handling enterprise-scale datasets


Analysis Requirements:

Need to examine individual events within massive campaigns
Correlation analysis requires multiple event samples
Timeline reconstruction needs paginated event access



Recommended Pagination Strategy:
Suggested pagination parameters for massive campaigns
'''python
{
  "page_size": 100,           # Manageable chunk size
  "page": 1,                  # Current page
  "sort_by": "@timestamp",    # Consistent ordering
  "sort_order": "desc",       # Most recent first
  "total_available": 15847,   # Total matching events
  "has_more": true,          # Pagination indicator
  "cursor": "2025-07-04T12:41:16.136_AZfWUDhS4mHfpl_Krgfk"
}
'''
# High Priority Enhancements
## 1. Pagination Support (Done)
'''python
{
  "page_size": 100,
  "page_number": 1,
  "total_results": 15000,
  "has_more": true,
  "results": [...],
  "next_page_token": "abc123"
}
'''
## 2. Field Selection/Projection (Done)
'''python 
query_dshield_events(
    filters={"source_ip": "141.98.80.135"},
    fields=["@timestamp", "source_ip", "destination_port", "event.category"],
    size=1000
)
'''
## 3. Enhanced Time Range Handling (Done)
'''python
{
  "time_range": {
    "start": "2025-07-04T12:00:00Z",
    "end": "2025-07-04T13:00:00Z"
  }
  # OR
  "relative_time": "last_6_hours"
  # OR  
  "time_window": {"around": "2025-07-04T12:41:16Z", "window_minutes": 30}
}
'''
## 4. Aggregation Queries (Done)
'''python
query_dshield_aggregations(
    group_by=["source_ip", "destination_port"],
    metrics=["count", "unique_sessions"],
    time_range_hours=24,
    top_n=50
)
'''
## 6. Smart Query Optimization (Done)
Automatically optimize queries based on data volume
'''python 
query_dshield_events(
    filters={...},
    optimization="auto",  # auto-reduce fields if result too large
    fallback_strategy="aggregate"  # fall back to aggregations
)
'''
## 7. Query Performance Metrics (Done)
Track and return detailed query performance metrics for all queries.

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-05

**Implementation:** See [docs/performance_metrics.md](performance_metrics.md)

**Key Features:**
- Tracks query time, indices scanned, documents examined, query complexity, optimizations applied, and more
- Metrics included in `pagination_metadata` and aggregation responses
- Works for all query types: simple, complex, paginated, cursor-based, and aggregation
- Enables visibility into backend performance and optimization effectiveness

**Example Response:**
```json
{
  "pagination_metadata": { ... },
  "performance_metrics": {
    "query_time_ms": 1234,
    "optimization_applied": ["pagination", "field_reduction"],
    "indices_scanned": 5,
    "total_documents_examined": 10000,
    "query_complexity": "complex"
  }
}
```
=======

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-05

**Implementation Details:**
- **Automatic Size Estimation**: Estimates query result size before execution using count queries
- **Field Optimization**: Reduces fields to essential ones when results are too large (priority fields: @timestamp, source_ip, destination_ip, etc.)
- **Page Size Reduction**: Automatically reduces page size if needed (minimum 10)
- **Fallback Strategies**: 
  - `aggregate`: Returns aggregation results (top sources, destinations, event types, timeline)
  - `sample`: Returns a small sample of events (10 events)
  - `error`: Returns error with explanation
- **Configuration**: `max_result_size_mb` (default: 10.0), `query_timeout_seconds` (default: 30)
- **MCP Integration**: All parameters available in MCP server with enhanced response formatting
- **Test Coverage**: Comprehensive test script in `dev_tools/test_smart_query_optimization.py`

**Test Results:**
- Size estimation: ✅ (4.88 MB detected for large queries)
- Field reduction: ✅ (20 fields → 13 priority fields)
- Page size reduction: ✅ (1000 → 500 → fallback)
- Aggregation fallback: ✅ (returns summary events)
- Sampling fallback: ✅ (returns sample events)
- Performance monitoring: ✅ (optimization metadata included)
## 7. Template/Preset Queries
Pre-built queries for common analysis patterns
'''python
get_ssh_brute_force_analysis(time_range_hours=24)
get_port_scan_analysis(source_ip="1.2.3.4")
get_campaign_analysis(indicators=["ssh_key", "malware_hash"])
'''

## 8. Enhanced Export Options
# Different output formats
'''python
export_dshield_analysis(
    query={...},
    format="csv|json|misp|stix",
    include_metadata=True
)
'''
## 9. Smart Chunking with Session Context (Done)
Stream and chunk events by session context for better event correlation and analysis.

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-06

**Implementation:** See [docs/smart_chunking_session_context.md](smart_chunking_session_context.md)

**Key Features:**
- Groups events by session context (e.g., source.ip, user.name, session.id)
- Ensures related events stay together in the same chunk
- Session summaries and performance metrics included in response
- Fully integrated with MCP server and client
- Extensible for future session-aware analytics

**Example Response:**
```json
{
  "events": [ ... ],
  "total_count": 1000,
  "next_stream_id": "2025-07-06T10:00:00Z|abc123",
  "session_context": {
    "session_fields": ["source.ip", "destination.ip", "user.name", "session.id"],
    "sessions_in_chunk": 12,
    "session_summaries": [ ... ],
    "performance_metrics": { ... }
  }
}
```

## 10. Campaign Analysis Debugging & Fixes (Done)
Comprehensive debugging and resolution of campaign analysis system issues.

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-06

**Implementation:** See [docs/BUG_003_SEED_EVENT_RETRIEVAL_FIX_IMPLEMENTATION.md](BUG_003_SEED_EVENT_RETRIEVAL_FIX_IMPLEMENTATION.md)

**Key Fixes:**
- **BUG-001**: Field mapping issues resolved with ECS field support
- **BUG-002**: API parameter mismatches fixed
- **BUG-003**: Seed event retrieval failure resolved with simplified query logic
- **BUG-004**: Tuple unpacking errors fixed
- **BUG-005**: Query syntax errors resolved

**Test Results:**
- **Before:** 2/6 tests passing (33% success rate)
- **After:** 6/6 tests passing (100% success rate) ✅
- **Campaign Analysis:** Fully functional with all 7 correlation stages working
- **Production Ready:** Complete threat hunting capabilities

**GitHub Issues:**
- [#26](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/26) - BUG-001: Field Mapping Issues (RESOLVED)
- [#27](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/27) - BUG-003: Seed Event Retrieval Failure (RESOLVED)
- [#28](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/28) - BUG-002: API Parameter Mismatch (RESOLVED)
- [#29](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/29) - BUG-004: Tuple Unpacking Error (RESOLVED)
- [#30](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/issues/30) - BUG-005: Query Syntax Error (RESOLVED)

**Pull Request:**
- [#35](https://github.com/datagen24/dsheild-mcp/pull/35) - Fix BUG-003: Resolve seed event retrieval failure and complete campaign analysis functionality
  }
}
```
## 10. Enhanced Threat Intelligence Integration
Bulk IP enrichment with caching
'''python 
enrich_bulk_ips(
    ip_list=["1.2.3.4", "5.6.7.8"],
    sources=["dshield", "virustotal", "shodan"],
    cache_duration_hours=24
)
'''
## 11. Query Performance Metrics
Return query performance data
'''python 
{
  "results": [...],
  "performance": {
    "query_time_ms": 1234,
    "index_hit_count": 5,
    "total_docs_scanned": 15000,
    "optimization_applied": "field_reduction"
  }
}
'''
## 12. Saved Queries and Dashboards
Save common queries for reuse
'''python 
save_query(
    name="daily_ssh_attacks",
    query={...},
    schedule="daily_at_09:00"
)
'''
# Specific Suggestions for Current Issues
## For the Large Dataset Problem:
Smart chunking with session context
'''python 
query_dshield_session_details(
    session_id="AZfWUDhS4mHfpl_Krgfk",
    include_related=True,
    max_related_events=100
)
'''
## For Event Correlation:
Get events related to specific event
'''python 
get_related_events(
    event_id="AZfWUDhS4mHfpl_Krgfk",
    correlation_fields=["source_ip", "session", "attack_pattern"],
    time_window_minutes=60
)
'''
## For Campaign Analysis:
Analyze attack campaigns
'''python
analyze_attack_campaign(
    seed_event="AZfWUDhS4mHfpl_Krgfk",
    expansion_criteria=["same_source_ip", "similar_ttps", "time_proximity"],
    max_events=1000
)
'''
# Configuration and Management
## 13. Dynamic Configuration
Adjustable limits and timeouts
'''python 
configure_mcp_server(
    max_result_size_mb=10,
    query_timeout_seconds=30,
    enable_auto_pagination=True,
    default_page_size=100
)
'''
## 14. Query History and Replay
Track and replay queries
'''python 
get_query_history(user_session="abc123")
replay_query(query_id="xyz789", modified_params={...})
'''
## 15. Field Mapping Bug Fix (Done)
Fix the mismatch between display fields and query fields as described in GitHub issue #17
'''python
# Before: User-friendly field names failed
query_dshield_events(filters={"source_ip": "141.98.80.135"})  # ❌ No results

# After: Intelligent field mapping works
query_dshield_events(filters={"source_ip": "141.98.80.135"})  # ✅ 10,000 events
query_dshield_events(filters={"source.ip": "141.98.80.135"})  # ✅ 10,000 events (same)
'''

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-05

**Implementation Details:**
- **Intelligent Field Mapping**: Automatically converts user-friendly field names to ECS dot notation
- **Comprehensive Coverage**: Maps 50+ common field variations (source_ip → source.ip, event_type → event.type, etc.)
- **Backward Compatibility**: ECS dot notation continues to work unchanged
- **Helpful Logging**: Logs field mappings and provides suggestions for unmapped fields
- **Query Consistency**: Both formats return identical results
- **Test Coverage**: Comprehensive test script in `dev_tools/test_field_mapping.py`

**Field Mapping Examples:**
- `source_ip`, `src_ip`, `sourceip` → `source.ip`
- `destination_ip`, `dest_ip`, `target_ip` → `destination.ip`
- `event_type`, `eventtype` → `event.type`
- `http_method`, `httpmethod` → `http.request.method`
- `user_agent`, `useragent`, `ua` → `user_agent.original`
- `severity` → `event.severity`
- `timestamp`, `time`, `date` → `@timestamp`

**Test Results:**
- User-friendly field names: ✅ (source_ip works)
- ECS dot notation: ✅ (source.ip works)  
- Mixed field formats: ✅ (both in same query)
- Field suggestions: ✅ (helpful alternatives)
- Query consistency: ✅ (identical results)
- Comprehensive mapping: ✅ (50+ field variations)

## 16. Campaign Analysis (Done)
Advanced threat hunting and investigation capabilities for coordinated attack campaigns.

**Status:** ✅ Complete as of 2025-07-06

**Implementation:** See [CAMPAIGN_ANALYSIS_IMPLEMENTATION.md](CAMPAIGN_ANALYSIS_IMPLEMENTATION.md)

**Key Features:**
- **Multi-Stage Correlation Engine**: 7-stage correlation pipeline (IP, infrastructure, behavioral, temporal, geospatial, signature, network)
- **7 MCP Tools**: Complete campaign investigation toolkit
- **Enhanced Behavioral Analysis**: Attack sequence detection, user agent patterns, payload signatures
- **Network Correlation**: Subnet-based analysis using `ipaddress` module
- **Campaign Data Models**: Campaign, CampaignEvent, and IndicatorRelationship classes
- **IOC Expansion**: Multiple strategies (comprehensive, infrastructure, temporal, network)
- **Timeline Building**: Configurable granularity with TTP analysis
- **Campaign Comparison**: Similarity analysis and attribution
- **Real-time Detection**: Ongoing campaign detection with configurable thresholds
- **User Configuration Integration**: Campaign settings in configuration system

**MCP Tools Implemented:**
1. `analyze_campaign` - Core campaign analysis from seed indicators
2. `expand_campaign_indicators` - IOC expansion with multiple strategies
3. `get_campaign_timeline` - Detailed attack timeline building
4. `compare_campaigns` - Campaign similarity and attribution analysis
5. `detect_ongoing_campaigns` - Real-time campaign detection
6. `search_campaigns` - Campaign search by criteria
7. `get_campaign_details` - Comprehensive campaign information

**Test Results:**
- All 11 tests passing (100% success rate)
- Multi-stage correlation: ✅
- MCP tool integration: ✅
- User configuration: ✅
- Error handling: ✅
- Performance metrics: ✅

**Production Ready:**
- Ready for live DShield SIEM integration
- Handles enterprise-scale event volumes (10,000+ events)
- Configurable thresholds and parameters
- Comprehensive error handling and logging
- Performance optimization and monitoring

**Example Usage:**
```python
# Analyze suspicious IP campaign
campaign = await analyze_campaign(
    seed_indicators=["192.168.1.100"],
    time_range_hours=168,
    correlation_methods=["ip_correlation", "temporal_correlation", "network_correlation"],
    min_confidence=0.7
)

# Expand campaign indicators
expanded = await expand_campaign_indicators(
    campaign_id="campaign_abc123",
    expansion_depth=3,
    expansion_strategy="comprehensive"
)

# Detect ongoing campaigns
ongoing = await detect_ongoing_campaigns(
    time_window_hours=24,
    min_event_threshold=15,
    correlation_threshold=0.8
)
```
