docs/api/markdown/tui.screens.api_key_screen.md, before:

# api_key_screen

API key generation screen for DShield MCP TUI.

This module provides a modal screen for generating and configuring API keys
with permissions, expiration, and rate limiting options.

## APIKeyGenerated

Message sent when an API key has been generated.

#### __init__

```python
def __init__(self, key_config)
```

Initialize API key generated message.

        Args:
            key_config: Configuration for the generated API key

## APIKeyGenerationScreen

Modal screen for API key configuration and generation.

#### __init__

```python
def __init__(self)
```

Initialize the API key generation screen.

#### compose

```python
def compose(self)
```

Compose the screen layout.

#### on_button_pressed

```python
def on_button_pressed(self, event)
```

Handle button press events.

#### _generate_api_key

```python
def _generate_api_key(self)
```

Generate API key with the configured settings.

#### _confirm_key_generation

```python
def _confirm_key_generation(self)
```

Confirm key generation and send the message.

#### on_mount

```python
def on_mount(self)
```

Handle screen mount event.

Commit message:

feat: implement secure API key generation with one-time reveal flow
- Add secure generate_api_key() method with configurable length and encoding
- Implement SHA-256 hashing with per-key random salt for secure storage
- Add deterministic key_id generation (short hash + timestamp)
- Update TUI to show one-time plaintext key in modal with proper cleanup
- Implement connection panel refresh after successful key generation
- Add comprehensive tests for all new functionality
- Update API documentation and run quality checks

Key features:
- Cryptographically secure key generation using secrets module
- One-time plaintext key display with automatic memory cleanup
- Secure hashing with random salt for storage
- Integration with 1Password CLI for secret management
- Full TUI integration with modal screens and panel updates
- Comprehensive test coverage for security and functionality

Security considerations:
- Plaintext keys never logged or stored persistently
- Memory cleared immediately after one-time display
- All keys hashed with unique salt before storage
- Integration with existing secrets management infrastructure

docs/api/markdown/tui.screens.api_key_screen.md, after:

# api_key_screen

API key generation screen for DShield MCP TUI.

This module provides a modal screen for generating and configuring API keys
with permissions, expiration, and rate limiting options.

## APIKeyGenerated

Message sent when an API key has been generated.

#### __init__

```python
def __init__(self, key_config)
```

Initialize API key generated message.

        Args:
            key_config: Configuration for the generated API key

## APIKeyGenerationScreen

Modal screen for API key configuration and generation.

#### __init__

```python
def __init__(self)
```

Initialize the API key generation screen.

#### compose

```python
def compose(self)
```

Compose the screen layout.

#### on_button_pressed

```python
def on_button_pressed(self, event)
```

Handle button press events.

#### _generate_api_key

```python
def _generate_api_key(self)
```

Generate API key with the configured settings.

#### _confirm_key_generation

```python
def _confirm_key_generation(self)
```

Confirm key generation and send the message.

#### _clear_plaintext_key

```python
def _clear_plaintext_key(self)
```

Clear the plaintext key from memory for security.

#### on_dismiss

```python
def on_dismiss(self)
```

Handle screen dismissal - clear plaintext key.

#### on_mount

```python
def on_mount(self)
```

Handle screen mount event.
